---
layout: post
title:  "\"Pedophilia\": On the age of consent and what relationships are appropriate"
description: "Analyzing what should constitute child sexual abuse and the logic of the age of consent"
author: "Colleirose"
permalink: /age-of-consent
date: 2024-07-29
last_modified_at: 2024-07-29
---

Every now and then, this argument comes up in various circles I'm in. I feel that it is <a href="https://hereticsofia.com/on-the-nature-of-controversy-and-persistence-stand-your-ground" rel="noopener">necessary to cover this</a> as increasingly more mostly-innocent people are falsely labeled as "pedophiles" and "groomers" for relationships that I feel have insufficient evidence to be considered abusive. Given that I am still a minor myself, I feel that most people will dismiss anything I say and immediately declare that I've been groomed. I am still happy and healthy, yet my unidentified "groomer" has "harmed" me by making me believe that being the magic number 18 doesn't make everything safe, and being below the magic number doesn't make everything dangerous.

I will now lay out my full argument:

The concept of being a "minor" isn't something scientific, it's just a legal and social construct. You don't have some sudden change in knowledge and maturity when you turn 18. The age of consent being 18 is <u>1)</u> not true and <u>2)</u> not based on science. A few hundred years ago, the age of consent was around 8-12 years old. <a href="https://annas-archive.org/md5/8c3250ee920b324a8a05d176b3c7ddc7" rel="noopener">It was changed due to valid concerns over young children and teenagers getting involved in sex work and then being raped, drugged, and abused</a>, so by raising the age of consent, minors would be effectively prevented from engaging in sex work. However, the age of consent __was not__ raised to specifically 18 based on any research. In fact, it was usually raised to around 16. In most places, the AoC ranges around 16-18. In Germany, <a href="https://skeptics.stackexchange.com/a/35612" rel="noopener">the AoC depends on how old the partner is, starting at 14</a>; <a href="https://www.ageofconsent.net/world/brazil" rel="noopener">in Brazil, it is 14</a>; in the US, <a href="https://www.ageofconsent.net/states" rel="noopener">it depends on the state</i>. Although "18" is often cited as the age of consent, it is actually not nearly that simple.

"Minors can't consent" isn't logical at all. If consent is only based on the law, then is it okay to rape your spouse if you travel to a country <a href="https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/26318318221083709" rel="noopener">where raping your spouse is legal</a>? No. The law doesn't judge morality. You might say that psychologically, a minor's ability to consent is impaired, but why is 18 an age where you gain some sudden maturity? A difference in neurological development alone does not determine consent. Although <a href="https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/the-teen-brain-7-things-to-know" rel="noopener">the brain "finishes developing" around the mid-twenties</a>, this does not determine ability to consent. <a href="https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/basics/neuroscience/how-the-brain-develops" rel="noopener">Development of the brain and its correlation with maturity vary from person to person</a>. We must also consider that although the brain finishes developing in the mid-twenties, people are given the ability to consent to sex before their mid-twenties, i.e., <i>before their brain is fully developed</i>, and yet are not harmed. This casts doubt on the claim that relationships before 18 are per se grooming. We seem to believe that any relationship before the age of 18 needs hightened scrutiny <i>per se</i>. A great example is <a href="https://www.courtlistener.com/docket/68946797/1/3/united-states-v-in-re-search-of-information-associated-with-apple-id/" rel="noopener">this criminal investigation</a>, wherein an individual was investigated due to suspicions of them being involved in a relationship with a 17-year-old while being an adult. If the 17-year-old was only a year older, there would be no crime to investigate. What is the inherent difference between 17 and 18?

<a href="https://annas-archive.org/scidb/10.1080/10538712.2014.960632" rel="noopener">There is no clear definition of what constitutes grooming</a>. You can point to studies that say minors who have sex with adults are inherently abused. I do not have the ability to go through every study because there are too many of them. But from the ones I can find, they all operate under the premise that it's already proven that sex before 18 is per se harmful. They look at people who had voluntarily engaged in sex with adults as a minor <i>along with</i> people who were physically forced, and draws the conclusion about what lasting effects both groups combined together have. But there was never any proof that just the first group alone is inherently traumatized. Furthermore, these studies have covered specifically <i>physical sexual contact</i>, not romantic relationships and not sexting.

Here are some studies, by way of example, that I located by searching PubMed for phrases such as `child sexual abuse` and `child grooming`, as well as viewing the citations of other research from the identified research:
- *Ilene R. Berson (2003) Grooming Cybervictims, Journal of School Violence, 2:1, 5-18, DOI: 10.1300/J202v02n01_02*: This study further defines grooming broadly, constituting nearly any online adult-minor relationships as grooming, while failing to provide any evidence that such relationships are per se harmful. Many of the conclusions of the research provide absolutely no evidence or citation, and instead make broad claims <i>with no evidence</i> about youth supposedly being incredibly easy to manipulate without exception. (Full text: <a href="https://annas-archive.org/scidb/10.1300/J202v02n01_02" rel="noopener">https://annas-archive.org/scidb/10.1300/J202v02n01_02</a>)
- *Beitchman JH, Zucker KJ, Hood JE, daCosta GA, Akman D, Cassavia E. A review of the long-term effects of child sexual abuse. Child Abuse Negl. 1992;16(1):101-18. doi: 10.1016/0145-2134(92)90011-f. PMID: 1544021*: "The evidence suggests that sexual abuse is an important problem with serious long-term sequelae; but the **specific effects of sexual abuse, independent of force, threat of force, or such family variables as parental psychopathology, are still to be clarified**" (emphasis added) - This partially substantiates my argument, but again, it defines any adult-minor sex as per se abusive without the evidence proving that (Full text: <a href="https://annas-archive.org/scidb/10.1016/0145-2134(92)90011-f" rel="noopener">https://annas-archive.org/scidb/10.1016/0145-2134(92)90011-f</a>)
- *Dallam SJ, Gleaves DH, Cepeda-Benito A, Silberg JL, Kraemer HC, Spiegel D. The effects of child sexual abuse: Comment on Rind, Tromovitch, and Bauserman (1998). Psychol Bull. 2001 Nov;127(6):715-33. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.127.6.715. PMID: 11726068.*: This is true. Rind et al. failed to prove that adult-minor sex is per se abusive, but it also made the point that studies have not distinguished between forced and non-forced adult-minor sex. Full text: <a href="https://annas-archive.org/scidb/10.1037/0033-2909.127.6.715" rel="noopener">https://annas-archive.org/scidb/10.1037/0033-2909.127.6.715</a> (keep in mind that it does refute Rind et al., but also: "Please note that the purpose of our article is not to argue that all types of sexual abuse do in fact cause pervasive and intense harm in all victims. Indeed, **it is well recognized in the empirical literature that the aftereffects of CSA are extremely varied and that a significant percentage of abused children remain asymptomatic**" [emphasis added])
- *Glina F, Carvalho J, Barroso R, Cardoso D. Lay People´s Myths Regarding Pedophilia and Child Sexual Abuse: A Systematic Review. Sex Med Rev. 2022 Oct;10(4):596-619. doi: 10.1016/j.sxmr.2022.06.010. Epub 2022 Aug 25. PMID: 36030179*: "Sexual abuse is **legally defined** as the engagement in sexual contact with a person **below a specified age** or who is incapable of giving consent. Both, pedophilia and child sexual abuse (CSA) are worldwide phenomena requiring deep scientific knowledge in order to improve prevention strategies" (emphasis added) - the reviewed evidence didn't demonstrate that the legal age alone creates abuse. (I could not find the full text because <a href="https://academic.oup.com/smr/article-lookup/doi/10.1016/j.sxmr.2022.06.010" rel="noopener">it's behind paywall</a> and not on Anna's Archive.)

Most articles I found when searching PubMed were about CSA prevention and such without studying its effects. I am sure there are other studies, but again, they suffer from the same flaw I pointed out earlier with sampling, and also only make a conclusion regarding physical sexual contact. This is not substantiated by any studies, so I may be entirely wrong, but from what I've heard talking to minors, I suspect that some of the negative effects from consensual adult-minor relationships are from iatrogenic harm caused by the stress of themselves or their partner being the subject of a criminal investigation, or from being unfairly stigmatized.

Of course, my argument regarding this will always be dismissed by anyone I mention it to, as people will always believe that I have been groomed by someone, and that it is impossible for a minor to come to <i>ever</i> this conclusion on their own. In the alternative, they may conclude that I am an adult, grooming some unidentified minor, lying about their age online, and again provide no evidence of this. Emotional desires to "protect children" cause any rationale discourse to be immediately shut down; if anyone can be painted as a "pedophile", <a href="https://www.lgbtqnation.com/2024/07/trans-teacher-files-human-rights-complaint-after-libs-of-tiktok-doxxes-them/" rel="nofollow">they will be harassed and threatened regardless of whether they actually are</a>.

I do not claim that all adult-minor relationships are healthy. I am very much aware of the possible for dangerous power dynamics. However, this does not mean they are per se abusive. Please consider that not everyone is the same and some adult-minor relationships can turn out okay.